# Spotify-Artist-Collaboration-Network
The Spotify Collaboration dataset includes 20,000 artists and their collaborations. The objective of the research was to explore the Spotify Network, employing the materials learned in class. Predicting users’ influence on social media using traditional methods is a significantly researched problem. The motivation of this project is to explore the Spotify dataset using PySpark instead of traditional methods. A study conducted by Zhang, A.-J., et. al. described a machine learning approach using efficient public opinion prediction to analyze the influence on social media. Another study employed URLS, rather than traditional measures to explore how users influenced each other. Another researcher discussed the prediction of future events in social media, while a fourth study described how influential users can hold power in online social networks. A fifth study discussed the influence of users in dynamics predictions. While these studies employ more traditional methods for prediction, this study will explore the data using Pyspark. The dataset included 20,000 artists whose songs made it to Spotify weekly charts, and an additional 136,000 artists with at least one featured song. There were also 300,000+ collaboration edges between the musicians, who functioned as the nodes. The dataset contained two csv files—one with edge information, where id_0 and id_1 indicated the connection columns. The second file included the node information, with spotify_id, name, followers, popularity, genres, and chart_hits. 
Columns in the edge_csv file represented id_0 and id_1, which indicated the two nodes the edge was connected to. Columns in the node_csv file included spotify_id, name, followers, popularity, genres, and chart_hits, representing various important pieces of the artist’s Spotify. The spotify_id column was similar to the edge_csv file, in that it contained a string location of the node. The name column represented the name of the artist, while the followers column represented the number of followers, and popularity column was a ranking from 1 to 100, based on the number of people who listened. The genre was a list of strings, such as ‘hip hop’, ‘nordic house’, and ‘dancehall’. The final column was the chart_hits column, which contained a ranking of the artist by different countries. The columns in both files were primarily string variable types. Popularity was the only double variable type. The average followers_count was 86,224.26 while the average popularity was only at 21.16. While both variables had the same count, the followers column had a significantly higher mean and standard deviation than the popularity column. The distribution of the followers column was significantly larger than the distribution of the popularity. The dataset contained 300,386 edges (collaborations) and 156,422 nodes (artists). There were 102 missing values in the nodes file and 7 missing values in the edges file, which were handled by na.drop to remove those values. The resulting dataset contained 156320 nodes and 300379 edges.
The data was loaded using PySpark. The zip file was handled with the imported zipfile library, and the data was then split into the two csv files using Spark reading. After the missing values were dropped, both datasets were converted to Pandas dataframes. The graph was created with rows, where each node was from the nodes_pd and each edge was from the edges_pd. For this analysis, a subset of a random 5,000 artists based on the number of followers to improve computational efficiency was employed. To confirm the subset is representative of the larger dataset, the degree distributions were compared. The subset of 5,000 artists had a similar distribution to the large dataset, where many of the degrees were one or fewer. The graph visualization was shaped as a large circle with some smaller circles in the middle. Visualizing the entire graph was impossible, as the RAM could not physically handle all the nodes.
Five types of centrality measures were calculated. Degree centrality measures how many collaborations an artist has. Betweenness centrality measures how often an artist lies on the shortest path between two other artists. Closeness centrality measures how close an artist is to other artists. Eigenvector centrality measures how influential an artist’s neighbors are, while PageRank describes how artists who are connected to other artists with a higher influence are more influential in the network, due to the nature of their connections. Given the previous comparison of node sample sizes, I concluded that larger or smaller samples of nodes would have a similar centrality structure to the 5,000 nodes chosen. All the centrality measures had most of their counts close to 0. This is due to the sparse nature of the graph. The centrality scores were also significantly low, with none passing 0.5.
A.R Rahman is ranked as the top artist for degree, and PageRank centrality, but does not rank in the top 5 centrality scores for the other centrality measures. INNA and Sak Noel appear in all the centrality measures at different rankings within the top 5. Other artists in the top 5 include Rico Bernasconi, in degree, betweenness, closeness, and eigenvector centralities. Good Times Ahead appears in closeness and betweenness centralities. KSHMR appears in the top 5 for betweenness and closeness centralities. A.R. Rahman and Rico Bernasconi have a high influence on the network, due to their appearance in the top 5 of multiple centrality measures. 
The graph included some other interesting graph properties, such as the number of connected components. This was 4338, which indicates that the graph is highly fragmented, with many disconnected subgraphs. The network diameter was unable to be calculated, due to the size of the graph. The edge density was 0.00000246, indicating there are very few edges connecting the nodes. The average degree of a node is 3.48, indicating that on average, artists have an extremely low number of collaborations. As mentioned before, the network is extremely sparse, with more unrelated subgraphs than large, connected graphs.
A dataframe was completed using Spark’s CreateDataframe function to combine all the centrality dataframes with the followers column. For the Linear Regression Model, a VectorAssembler was employed to create a vector to be used in the model. This included the five centrality measures, as well as the followers column. The assembled file was given an output column of ‘features’ with a label. The data was then split into 80% training and 20% testing, with 4,000 observations for training and 1,000 observations for testing, as well as a random seed of 42.
The model achieved an R-squared score of 0.1092 indicating that about 11% of the variance in the user popularity could be explained by the features. The Root Mean Squared Error, or RMSE, was 500,272.62, indicating that the model’s predicted followers count is off by over 500,000. This is an extremely large error, which suggests that the model isn’t properly capturing the follower count, and the centrality measures are not enough to predict the influence. Of the centrality measures, degree centrality had the highest coefficient, indicating that users with more collaborations were more likely to be popular. Betweenness and PageRank had the lowest coefficients. The intercept was 89419.16, indicating a baseline when all the centrality scores are 0. 
PySpark’s K-Means clustering was applied to group artists based on their centrality scores and follower count. Like the Linear Regression, the features were assembled into one vector, with an output column of features. A K-Means model was fitted with k=2, and a seed of 1 to predict an outcome. The Clustering Evaluator was employed to find silhouette scores for multiple sizes of clusters from 2 to 5. These silhouette scores then create the elbow graph to determine the optimal number of clusters, at k=4.0. The data was then scaled appropriately and the model using k=4 was run to create a graph with the four clusters. The resulting graph, of followers versus PageRank, demonstrated that Cluster 1 contains artists with a lower number of followers, while Cluster 2 contains artists who are more connected even without a high follower count. On the other hand, Cluster 3 are artists with a higher follower count, and Cluster 4 includes artists who have strong collaborations and maintain a decently high PageRank in the community.
The Spotify Artist Collaboration Dataset is an intriguing network to analyze. This project explored the network using centrality measures such as degree, betweenness, closeness, eigenvector, and PageRank, as well as other graph properties. A regression model was trained to predict the artist’s popularity based on the follower count, with the centrality measures acting as features. The model demonstrated that about 11% of the variance could be explained by the centrality measures. The Linear Regression model did poorly in predicting the popularity. A K-Means clustering was also computed, where artists were clustered based on their centrality scores and follower counts. Using the silhouette score, the optimal number of clusters was discovered, at k=4. The resulting clusters highlighted that the centrality measures did not accurately predict the follower count. PageRank was the most successful measure, while degree centrality struggled significantly. In conclusion, artists with a higher degree and PageRank centralities, such as A. R. Rahman, are more likely to be collaborating with other artists, thus earning a higher influence in the network. Future work could fine-tune the results to assist in music recommendations or marketing on social media. 


References:
Ghosh, R., & Lerman, K. (2025). Predicting Influential Users in Online Social Networks. Retrieved July 27, 2025, from arXiv.org website: https://arxiv.org/abs/1005.4882
Li, J., Peng, W., Li, T., Sun, T., Li, Q., & Xu, J. (2014). Social network user influence sense-making and dynamics prediction. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(11), 5115–5124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2014.02.038
Schoen, H., Gayo-Avello, D., Takis Metaxas, P., Mustafaraj, E., Strohmaier, M., & Gloor, P. (2013). The power of prediction with social media. Internet Research, 23(5), 528–543. https://doi.org/10.1108/intr-06-2013-0115
Xiao, C., Zhang, Y., Zeng, X., & Wu, Y. (2013). Predicting User Influence in Social Media. Journal of Networks, 8(11). https://doi.org/10.4304/jnw.8.11.2649-2655
Zhang, A.-J., Ding, R.-X., Pedrycz, W., & Chang, Z. (2025). Public opinion prediction on social media by using machine learning methods. Expert Systems with Applications, 269, 126287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2024.126287




